---
title: Bode et al. (2023)
subtitle: 'Non-instrumental information-seeking is resistant to acute stress'
date: 2023/07/05
authors:
- Bode, Stefan
- Jiwa, Matthew
- Chum, Chelsea
- Frost, Leilani
- Heekeren, Hauke
- Wingenfeld, Katja
- Deuter, Christian E
journal: PsyArXiv
paper_url: https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/cqag6
data_url: https://osf.io/v3752/
tags:
-
---

Previous research has shown that people intrinsically value non-instrumental information, which cannot be used to change the outcome of events, but only provides an early resolution of uncertainty. This is true even for information about rather inconsequential events, such as the outcomes of small lotteries. Here we investigated whether participants’ willingness to pay for non-instrumental information about the outcome of simple coin-flip lotteries with guaranteed winnings was modulated by acute stress. Stress was induced using the Socially Evaluated Cold Pressor Test (SECPT), and information-seeking choices were compared to a warm water control group. Our results neither support the hypothesis that stress decreases information-seeking by directing cognitive resources away from the relevance of the lotteries, nor the opposite hypothesis that stress increases information-seeking by driving anxiety levels up. Instead, we found that despite successful stress induction, as evidenced by increased saliva cortisol levels in the SECPT group, information valuation was remarkably stable. This finding is in line with recent findings that experimentally increased state anxiety did not modulate non-instrumental information seeking. Together, these results suggest that the aversiveness of “not knowing” is a stable cognitive state and not easily modulated by situational context, such as acute stress.
