---
title: Fan et al. (2023)
subtitle: 'Pupil size encodes uncertainty during exploration'
date: 2023/02/20
authors:
- Fan, Haoxue
- Burke, Taylor Denee
- Sambrano, Deshawn
- Dial, Emily
- Phelps, Elizabeth A
- Gershman, Samuel J
journal: PsyArXiv
paper_url: https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/jnu45
data_url: https://osf.io/q795b/?view_only=1a86356258534a5498904a393dbe0692
tags:
- eye-tracking
- 2-arm bandit
- information seeking
- explore/exploit
sample_size: 48
---

Exploration is an important part of decision making and is crucial to maximizing long-term reward. Past work has shown that people use different forms of uncertainty to guide exploration. In this study, we investigate the role of the pupil-linked arousal system in uncertainty-guided exploration. We measured participants' pupil dilation (N = 48) while they performed a two- armed bandit task. Consistent with previous work, we found that people adopted a hybrid of directed, random and undirected exploration, which are sensitive to relative uncertainty, total uncertainty and value difference between options, respectively. We also found a positive correlation between pupil size and total uncertainty. Furthermore, augmenting the choice model with subject-specific total uncertainty estimates decoded from the pupil size improved predictions of held-out choices, suggesting that people used the uncertainty estimate encoded in pupil size to decide which option to explore Together, the data shed light on the computations underlying uncertainty-driven exploration. Under the assumption that pupil size reflects Locus Coeruleus-Norepinephrine (LC-NE) neuromodulatory activity, these results also extend the theory of LC-NE function in exploration, highlighting its selective role in driving uncertainty- guided random exploration.
