---
title: Gera et al. (2022)
subtitle: A novel smartphone application for habit induction in humans
date: 2022/12/14
authors:
- Gera, Rani
- Barak, Segev
- Schonberg, Tom
journal: PsyArXiv
paper_url: https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/kgqun
data_url: https://github.com/ranigera/HabitApp
tags:
- two-step
- habits
- outcome devaluation
sample_size: 145
---

Habits are a prominent feature of both adaptive and maladaptive behavior. Yet, despite substantial research efforts, there are currently no well-established experimental procedures for habit induction in humans. It is likely that laboratory experimental settings, as well as the session-based structure typically used in controlled experiments (also outside the lab), impose serious constraints on studying habits and other effects that are sensitive to context, motivation, and training duration and frequency. To overcome these challenges, we devised a unique real-world free-operant task structure, implemented through a novel smartphone application, whereby participants could freely enter the app (24 hours a day, 7 days a week) to win rewards. This procedure is free of typical laboratory constraints, yet well-controlled. Using the canonical sensitivity to outcome devaluation criterion, we successfully demonstrated habit formation as a function of training duration, a longstanding challenge in the field. Additionally, we show a positive relationship between multiple facets of engagement/motivation and goal-directedness. We suggest that our novel paradigm can be used to study the neurobehavioral and psychological mechanism underlying habits in humans. Moreover, the real-world free-operant framework can potentially be used to examine other instrumental behavior- related questions, with greater face validity in naturalistic conditions.
