---
title: Kemp et al. (2022)
subtitle: Association of Multidimensional Schizotypy with PID-5 Domains and Facets
date: 2022/02/26
authors:
- Kemp, Kathryn
- Kaczorowski, Jessica
- Burgin, Chris J
- Raulin, Michael
- Lynam, Donald
- Sleep, Chelsea E
- Miller, Josh
- Barrantes-Vidal, Neus
- Kwapil, Thomas Richard
journal: PsyArXiv
paper_url: https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/97tpw
data_url: https://osf.io/v8fyt/
tags:
- self-report only
- schizotypy
- anxiety
- depression
sample_size: 1
---

The underlying vulnerability for schizophrenia-spectrum disorders is expressed across a continuum of clinical and subclinical symptoms and impairment referred to as schizotypy. Schizotypy is a multidimensional construct with positive, negative, and disorganized dimensions. Models of pathological personality provide useful frameworks for assessing the multidimensional structure of schizotypy. The present study examined the association of positive, negative, and disorganized schizotypy with pathological personality traits and facets assessed by the Personality Inventory for DSM-5 (PID-5) in 1,342 young adults. As hypothesized, positive schizotypy was largely associated with the PID-5 psychoticism domain and facets, negative schizotypy was primarily associated with the detachment domain and facets and the restricted affectivity facet, and disorganized schizotypy's strongest associations were with the distractibility and eccentricity facets and the negative affect domain. Negative schizotypy was differentiated from the other two schizotypy dimensions in its pattern of correlations with the PID-5 domains and facets. As expected, positive and disorganized schizotypy exhibited a moderate degree of similarity in their associations. Overall, the PID-5 domains accounted for approximately half of the variance in each of the schizotypy dimensions, and the PID-5 facets accounted for upwards of 2/3rds of the variance in each schizotypy dimension. The associations among the schizotypy and PID-5 measures did not appear to reflect highly redundant items across the measures. We conclude by providing regression-based algorithms for computing positive, negative, and disorganized schizotypy scores based on the PID-5 facets.
