---
title: Wan et al. (2022)
subtitle: 'Priority-based transformations of stimulus representation in visual working memory'
date: 2022/06/01
authors:
- Wan, Quan
- Menendez, Jorge A
- Postle, Bradley R
journal: PLoS Comput. Biol.
paper_url: https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pcbi.1009062
data_url: https://osf.io/sgqvn/
tags:
- 
---

How does the brain prioritize among the contents of working memory (WM) to appropriately guide behavior? Previous work, employing inverted encoding modeling (IEM) of electroencephalography (EEG) and functional magnetic resonance imaging (fMRI) datasets, has shown that unprioritized memory items (UMI) are actively represented in the brain, but in a "flipped", or opposite, format compared to prioritized memory items (PMI). To acquire independent evidence for such a priority-based representational transformation, and to explore underlying mechanisms, we trained recurrent neural networks (RNNs) with a long short-term memory (LSTM) architecture to perform a 2-back WM task. Visualization of LSTM hidden layer activity using Principal Component Analysis (PCA) confirmed that stimulus representations undergo a representational transformation-consistent with a flip-while transitioning from the functional status of UMI to PMI. Demixed (d)PCA of the same data identified two representational trajectories, one each within a UMI subspace and a PMI subspace, both undergoing a reversal of stimulus coding axes. dPCA of data from an EEG dataset also provided evidence for priority-based transformations of the representational code, albeit with some differences. This type of transformation could allow for retention of unprioritized information in WM while preventing it from interfering with concurrent behavior. The results from this initial exploration suggest that the algorithmic details of how this transformation is carried out by RNNs, versus by the human brain, may differ.
