---
title: Wu et al. (2023)
subtitle: 'Chunking as a rational solution to the speed-accuracy trade-off in a serial reaction time task'
date: 2023/05/11
authors:
- Wu, Shuchen
- Éltető, Noémi
- Dasgupta, Ishita
- Schulz, Eric
journal: Sci. Rep.
paper_url: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-023-31500-3
data_url: https://github.com/swu32/experimental_chunking
tags:
- 
---

When exposed to perceptual and motor sequences, people are able to gradually identify patterns within and form a compact internal description of the sequence. One proposal of how sequences can be compressed is people's ability to form chunks. We study people's chunking behavior in a serial reaction time task. We relate chunk representation with sequence statistics and task demands, and propose a rational model of chunking that rearranges and concatenates its representation to jointly optimize for accuracy and speed. Our model predicts that participants should chunk more if chunks are indeed part of the generative model underlying a task and should, on average, learn longer chunks when optimizing for speed than optimizing for accuracy. We test these predictions in two experiments. In the first experiment, participants learn sequences with underlying chunks. In the second experiment, participants were instructed to act either as fast or as accurately as possible. The results of both experiments confirmed our model's predictions. Taken together, these results shed new light on the benefits of chunking and pave the way for future studies on step-wise representation learning in structured domains.
