---
title: Ziv et al. (2022)
subtitle: 'Reaction time and working memory in gamers and non-gamers'
date: 2022/04/26
authors:
- Ziv, Gal
- Lidor, Ronnie
- Levin, Oron
journal: Sci. Rep.
paper_url: https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-10986-3
data_url: https://osf.io/s2vcz/?view_only=88caada978f141f787684cc2e63b7673
tags:
- 
---

The purpose of this pre-registered study was to examine whether asking gamers and non-gamers about their video game playing habits before or after they performed computerized cognitive-motor tasks affects their performance of those tasks. We recruited 187 participants from an online participants' recruitment platform. Out of those participants, 131 matched our criteria as gamers or non-gamers. They were then divided to two subgroups, and performed a choice-RT task, a Simon task, an alternate task-switching task, and a digit span memory task either before or after answering a video-game playing habits questionnaire. The results showed that gamers who completed a video-games questionnaire before performing the tasks had faster reaction times (RTs) in the Simon task compared with gamers who answered the questionnaire after performing the tasks. In contrast, non-gamers who answered the questionnaire before the task had slower RTs in the Simon task and the alternate task-switching task compared with non-gamers who answered the questionnaire after performing the tasks. The results suggest that answering a video-games questionnaire before the start of a study can lead to a response expectancy effect-positive for gamers and negative for non-gamers. This may bias findings of studies examining video games and the performance of cognitive-motor tasks.
